When you create an application, it is important to keep a record of the inputs, processes, outputs, and results of the application. These records can help developers with the task of debugging and maintaining code. The tool you can use to create them is logging. Logging can be used in a variety of situations, ranging from errors to simple informational outputs to confirm that a process has been completed. In this topic, we will see how we can set up and implement logging in Spring. Adding logging to a Spring project For our logging, we are going to use a component called Logback. This component will allow you to produce configurable log files, that can track activities within your application. The logback component is automatically added via , since it is the default logging component used by Spring. The logback component is accessible via an external interface called slf4j. With this, we can now create a logging class for our application. To do this, we will create a new component that handles the logging process. To use these components in our application, we will import them from slf4j. The slf4j components that are imported, namely Logger and LoggerFactory, allow us to construct objects to interface with Logback. The first component we have is an object called Logger. This object implements various functionalities related to writing to logs from the application. The Logger object is constructed using the method, which provides context for the Loggerobject to run in. With this object, you can use various methods to log data. The code below shows an example of how the Logger object can be constructed and used to log data to the console. To understand the logging process better, let's discuss the info method in more detail. In Logback, there is a set number of levels for logging. Here are these levels: Error: Used to track information when an application fails to execute successfully. Warn: Used when unexpected events happen that are not critical to the functionality of the application. Info: Used to log general information about the execution of the program. Debug: Used to help track program execution for fixing bugs or issues. Trace: Used to create more detailed and high-volume sets of information about program execution. When we use the info method, the text provided is logged at the info level. The output related to this log message is similar to one shown below. You can see that the log message has INFO in front of it, indicating the log level used. Another interesting feature of the log message is the fact that it shows the component that printed the log message, in this case, LoggingController. This is possible because when we created our Logger object, we gave it a reference to the class we are logging for, . Logging multiple components One important consideration to make when setting up logging is how to handle multiple application components. Suppose we want to add a second component named GreetingController to our previous code. We can set up a Logger object for this class in a similar way to the LoggingController class, however, to get the log to show the class we need, we provide it with as an argument. Here is the full code for the component: This class incorporates different types of errors to demonstrate what they look like in the log. To trigger the error case for this class, we just need to run the greetUser method with an empty string as an argument. For example, the code below shows one way we could trigger the error through a CommandLineRunner component. When this is run, the following will be displayed in the log. The key things to note here are that the two log messages were given two distinct levels, the first being INFO, and the second being ERROR. The second thing to note is that for each log message, the class that wrote to the log is different. This allows us to know exactly which class wrote each log message, making it easier to understand and debug the code. Now that we have a firm grasp on logging, time to discuss some ways to configure the logging process. Configuring Logback Logback can be configured using the file called , located in the resources folder of the project. In this configuration file, we can define how we want log messages to be created and formatted. Here is an example of Logback configuration. The configuration file will always start with the element as its root. The element lets us define how log data is displayed. In this example, we are using a ConsoleAppender, which will append log data to the console. The element defines the format of the data being logged. In this case, our log messages will display the hour, minute, second and millisecond of the message written, the level of the logged message, the component that logged the message, and the actual message. The text below shows an example of a formatted log message. The element allows you to attach your appender element to the root logger so that the logger knows how to properly log messages with the configuration. With this, we now have a functional configuration that can be adapted to any logging needs. Using the configurations, we can direct logs to be saved in locations other than the default console output. Often in production applications, we will want to save logs to a file. To do that, we can set the appender to use the component. When this is done, we will also provide the name of the log file, using a XML element. Here is an example of how we can set up a file-based logging system: In this example, all ERROR level messages will be saved to a file named . In a real project, we should ensure that this log file is saved outside of the project directory to make it more easily accessible. To learn more about the available configurations, you can visit the documentation for Logback. Conclusion Logs allow us to better understand and debug code as it runs. In real applications, logs can help us identify potential issues in production by showing you the flow of execution, and where potential errors can be encountered. You can add Logback to your project to create robust logs. When writing log messages, it is important to ensure the most appropriate logging level is used for the message. This will make it easier to sort through log messages for important information or errors. Finally, it is possible to configure the format and output of Logback logs through the file. This allows us to create detailed and valuable logs for our applications.